---
layout: post
title:  "Sunlight"
category: stockholm
---

Last week my Stockholm life got significantly better - two times!
One thing: I got a bike. Wuiii! Freedom!
According the Google Maps the way to work takes me about 50 minutes but the first tryout took me acutally quite a bit longer, though that might have been due to some stops to consult my phone to not get lost.
The area has a lot of hills, so it's quite some up and down but since my workdays basically consist of sitting around (on the phiscal side) thats most likely actually a good thing.
Also, the route is absolutely beautiful.

The other great improvement was that last sunday I moved to another room (inside the house where I live - fastest move ever).
The new room has a window. And it's approximately six times the size of the old room's window.
Also the window is suddenly not anymore located beneath the ground but a couple of meters over it.
Result: light! Lots of it. Endorphines going nuts.
On top of that, the window goes to the east. Which means: if I wake up at night at ... say 4am (god prevent), theres actually sun shining into my room.
4am? Really?
The whole sun thing here seemed rather crazy to me and I wanted to know how big the suntime difference to home* actually was so I decided to dig a little into sunrise/sunset data.
Google Maps tells us that the distance between Karlsruhe and Stockholm is about 1300km (funny side discovery - the distance measuring tool actually starts to bend for such distances - awesome).
Thats actually less than I expected but fine, still some distance.
Now for the sun.

I found a [website](http://www.timeanddate.com/sun/sweden/stockholm) which offered sunrise and sunset times in a nice way.
You can search for a city and get a list of sunrise and sunset times for any entire month you choose.
They even have an API, but you have to pay to access that.
Luckyly HTML is not exactly machine-unreadable, so some evening I invested half and hour to write a tiny script to grab the all data I needed.
Firering it up and retrieving the data for 2015, throwing some [plotter](http://www.chartjs.org/) on it and here we are (Stockholm blue, Karlsruhe red):

<canvas id="rise-set-times" style="width: 100%"></canvas>

Hm, not that spectacular.
Peaks where expected.
We see the winter-/summertime change - the jumps in March and October.
Differences are smaller than expected and a lot smaller than it feels right now (it feels LIIIIIIGHT right now).
One interesting thing are the intersections.
Sunrise times are equal in the beginning of February and the beginning of November.
But sunset times cross at the start of May and in August.
Accordingly the difference in sunrise times are right now a lot bigger (almost 2 hours) than the sunset times (probably half an hour).
The reason for that of course is that both cities are in the same timezone despite their east west distance of about 10 degrees of longitude.
If we wan't to ignore that distance we can take a look at the total time between sunrise and sunset:

<canvas id="sun-times" style="width: 100%"></canvas>

Now thats more what I expected.
Intersections at equinox and a maximum difference of about 2 and a half hour.
Still not much, but of course this data does not take into account that "after sunset" is not equal to "all light gone".
Acutally right now the nights here don't get completely dark anymore.
What's also a little weird is that if I sum up the hours of light over the total year I get a difference of about 42 and half an hour
([almost](http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/42_%28number%29#The_Hitchhiker.27s_Guide_to_the_Galaxy)) with more light for Stockholm.
No idea were that difference comes from.
But since I have better things to do than becoming an hobby astronomer I'm probably stuck with this mystery. Never mind.
So off I go actually enjoying that beautiful sun and discovering Sweden.
Until next time.

<sub>
  *My friends from Greifswald may excuse me taking Karlsruhe for "home" but it was a little bit better in terms of data. Greifswald is really just halfway between Karlsruhe and Stockholm and so it is in the data. Always just in the middle.
</sub>

<script src="/js/Chart.min.js"></script>
<script src="/js/chart_monkey_patch.js"></script>
<script src="/js/light_stats.js"></script>
<script type="text/javascript">
new Chart(document.getElementById("rise-set-times").getContext("2d")).Line(riseSetData, options);
new Chart(document.getElementById("sun-times").getContext("2d")).Line(sunTimeData, options);
</script>
